---
sidebar_position: 4
---
 
# Player data guide

This page covers setting up player data for your game in more detail.

## Setup

Get the required services and libraries.
```lua
local DataStoreService = game:GetService("DataStoreService")

local DocumentService = require(path.to.DocumentService)
local Guard = require(path.to.Guard)
```
- `Guard`: Used to validate data types.

## Player Data Structure

You need to define a structure for your data - this is called a schema.

**Define a type**:
It is useful to define your schema as a type.
```lua
type DataSchema = {
	Coins: number,
	XP: number,
}
```
You can add more fields as needed.

**Check function**:

The check function takes an unknown value (the value from Data Stores) and
verifies that it meets the correct format by returning a boolean. The second return type must match the
type of your default - however, this is only to help you prevent mistakes.

A good way to create a check function is to use [Guard](https://util.redblox.dev/guard.html). Create a standard interface check in Guard, and then wrap it with Guard.Check so it returns a boolean.

Note that, while it is recommended that you use a check function, you can of course write one
that always returns true if you are confident data won't be mistakenly corrupted!
In the future, the check function may be optional.

```lua
local DataInterface = {
	Coins = Guard.Integer,
	XP = Guard.Integer,
}

local function dataCheck(value: unknown): DataSchema
	assert(type(value) == "table", "Data must be a table")
	local Value: any = value

	return {
		Coins = DataInterface.Coins(Value.Coins),
		XP = DataInterface.XP(Value.XP),
	}
end
```

## Creating the DocumentStore

**DocumentStore**:
Set up the [DocumentStore](https://anthony0br.github.io/DocumentService/api/DocumentStore/) for player data.
```lua
local PlayerDocumentStore = DocumentService.DocumentStore.new({
	dataStore = DataStoreService:GetDataStore("PlayerData"),
	check = Guard.Check(dataCheck),
	default = {
		Coins = 0,
		XP = 0,
	},
	migrations = {
		{
			backwardsCompatible = false,
			migrate = function()
				-- Put a migration here!
			end
		}
	},
	-- This is an important feature of player data. It locks editing to one server
	-- at a time, allowing us to safely cache player data and save batches of updates.
	-- We do this through additional methods that session locking unlocks, such as
	-- `SetCache` and `GetCache`.
	lockSessions = true,
})
```
- `migrations`: Used to mutate your schema over time.
- `backwardsCompatible`: If `false`, the document with this version or later will not load in
servers whose latest version is prior to this version. Otherwise, this version will run
on old servers. Generally, removing or changing the type of a field is not backwards compatible,
but adding fields is.
- `lockSessions`: Prevents multiple devices from accessing the same player's data simultaneously.

## Best Practices

**Be very cautious of yielding:** Transforms and cache updates should never yield. When you are updating data, if you yield and some other code makes an update, that update could be reverted. Do not update between GetCache and SetCache pairs.

**Strict types:** Write your scripts in strict mode to benefit fully from the type-checking features of DocumentService. Be as precise as you can with types - using `any` or other loosely-defined types for your fields will have little to no benefit.

**Use good tools:** Roblox Studio's script editor doesn't provide great linting - luau-lsp is better
for taking full advantage of type-checking.

**Seperation:** You might want to put your default table, migrations, types and your check function in a separate file to keep things manageable and modular.

**Use cache where you can:** Minimise methods that call DataStore APIs, such as `Read` and `Update`, in
favour of `GetCache` and `SetCache`. This improves performance and reduces the chance of hitting limits.

**Don't change your migrations:** You should never delete a migration. You should not change migrations once they are live (unless you
really have to, but you should never change their effect).

## Editing Player Data

To modify the player's data on the server:
```lua
local document = YourPlayerDataModule:GetDocument(player)

if not document:IsOpen() then
	-- See "Waiting for a Document to Open" page if you need to wait for the document to be open
end

-- We need to clone the table and any sub-tables we intend to edit, since
-- DocumentService freezes tables on SetCache.
-- This forces immutable updates and helps you avoid creating bugs!
local documentClone = table.clone(document:GetCache())

documentClone.Coins = 99
documentClone.XP = 99
document:SetCache(documentClone)
```
- `document:SetCache()`: Updates the player's data cache, which is saved when the document is closed.

## Accessing data from the client

You can use any usual method to replicate data, e.g. RemoteEvents.

More advanced methods include loleris' Replica or sending a diff generated by nezuo's DeltaCompress.